week 02 - javaEclipse/practicalJavaEclipse.md, before:

# Department of Computing, Macquarie University
## Workshop - Java and Eclipse basics

# Assumptions

You have downloaded and installed Java SE (previously known as Java SDK) on your computer if you are using it. The software is installed in all Computing laboratories.

## IMPORTANT: Pair up for this lab. If you want to work individually, get permission from your tutor.

## Suggested Timeline 

- 5 minutes past start: Structure of a Java program
- 35 minutes past start: JUnit test example
- 70 minutes past start: Completing a simple Java program
- 90 minutes past start: Problem solving


## Structure of a Java program

The following is true for basic java programs (the kind we'll see in the beginning). More advanced program structures shall be discussed as needed.

- A basic java program resides in a `.java` file. 
- **By convention**, the file name begins with an uppercase letter and is camel-cased. For example `HelloWorld.java`.
- The first statement in a file named `XYZ.java` is the class header and must be:
		
```java
public class XYZ {
```

### Question 1.

Which of the following should be the first statement in a file named `Hello.java`?
	
1. `public class Hello {` 
2. `public class hello {`
3. `class Hello {`
4. `class hello {`


A class is like a container for java programs. A *runnable* java program contains a `main` method with the following **header** inside the class.

The header of the `main` method is:

```java
public static void main(String[] args)
```

- `public` means it can be seen by any other code in the program.
- `static` will be covered later.
- `void` because the method doesn't return any value.
- `main` is a special reserved name for this method (like `draw` in Processing).
- `String[]` means it accepts an array of Strings as parameter. We don't use that in this unit but that has to be there.
- `args` is the formal parameter name. We can use any valid value for a literal instead of this.

### Question 2.

Which of the following are valid headers for the `main` method?
	
1. `public static void main()`
2. `public void main(String[] args)`
3. `public static void main(String[] tom)`
4. `public static void Main(String[] jerry)`
5. `public static void main(int[] args)`
6. `public static void main(String args)`
7. `public void main(String args)`
8. `public static void main(String[] args)`

## The complete picture

So, with the class header outside and the method header inside, a java program looks like this:

```java
public class MyFirstProgram {
	public static void main(String[] args) {
		//your code goes here
	}
	
	//other methods (or functions)
}
```

### Question 3.

1. Create a new Java project named `simpleJavaProject`.
	1. **DO NOT create** `module-info.java` when prompted.
2. Right click on project and choose `New` -> `Class`. 
3. Choose the name `Product`.
	1. Make sure you enable the box for including `public static void main(String[] args)`.
4. In the `main` method of file `Product.java`, initialize two integers with names and values of your choice and display their product. Values are displayed using `System.out.println` method.
5. Run the program using the *Play* button. For example, if the variables hold the values 4 and 9, you should see the value 36 in the console. 

### Question 5.

1. Open package `practicalClassCodes` and then `week02`.

2. Double click on `Welcome.java` and run it using the `Play` Button.

3. You should see the output in the console.

4. Repeat steps 1-3 with `SpeedCalculator.java`

### Question 6.

Complete the steps described in the program `AverageSpeedCalculator.java` so that the average speed of a return trip is calculated. The output should be 15.384....

**TIP** `int/int = int` while `int/double = double`

### Question 7.

Another package in the same project is `practicePackage`, further containing `introduction` and then two packages - `attempts` and `testsAttempts`. Thus, the hierarchy being:

- `practicePackage`
	- `introduction`
		- `attempts`
		- `testsAttempts`

The questions are split across multiple stages. Your tutor will demonstrate what should be done for the following two methods:

1. `square(int)` in `Stage1.java` (method returning `int`), and, 
2. `isPositive(int)` in `Stage1.java`(method returning `boolean`).

**IMPORTANT** Please note that we expect, AT MOST, the top 2% students to be able to complete questions from the final Stage. So don't freak out because you can't solve those.

&nbsp;<p>

### Submission activity for this week

&nbsp;<p>


For week 2 - 

- Complete functions in the `practicePackage.introduction.attempts` package such that the corresponding tests in `practicePackage.introduction.testsAttempts` pass.
- each test passed gets you 3 out of 100 marks.
- total mark are capped at 100. So, passing 34 or more tests gets you 100/100, not more (unfortunately).
- passing mark is 60 (or at least 20 functions).
-  submit ALL corresponding files (so up to 6 java files). 
-  You can make the submission by **Sunday 8th August 21:00**. Late submissions for weekly tasks are NOT accepted.
-  The more functions you can solve, the better prepared you are for the unit. 

[![](http://img.youtube.com/vi/Q1oGIypsPls/0.jpg)](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Q1oGIypsPls "")

<!--Export the relevant part of the project to an archive file using steps shown in the following video

[![](http://img.youtube.com/vi/eeGrh_l5jp0/0.jpg)](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eeGrh_l5jp0 "")

1. Select the project `COMP1010_source_codes_for_students_updated` in the left panel so that it is highlighted in blue.
2. Choose `File`
3. Choose `Export`
4. Double-click (or expand) `General`
5. Double-click `Archive file`.
6. Uncheck the box against `COMP1010_source_codes_for_students`.
7. Choose only the package `practicePackage.introduction.attempts`.
8. Click on `Browse`
9. Choose location of your choice and choose the name `studentID_week_2_submission.zip` (studentID being your 8-digit student ID).
10. Click `Finish`.
11. Upload file `studentID_week_2_submission.zip` under `Week 2 submission`. For example, if your student ID is 40404040, the file you submit, must be `40404040_week_2_submission.zip`.-->

### Question 8 (Problem solving)

This question must be answered **on a piece of paper** that must be returned to the tutor once you've finished.

#### Sub-task 1

Complete the body of the method `sumIndexRange` that returns the sum of all items in the index range in the array passed. Some examples,

- `data = {10, 70, 20, 90, 30}`, `idx1 = 1`, `idx2 = 3` 
	
	--> return `70+20+90` = `180`

- `data = {10, 70, 20, 90, 30}`, `idx1 = 2`, `idx2 = 2` 
	
	--> return `20`
	
```java
public static int sumIndexRange(int[] data, int idx1, int idx2) {
	return 0;
	//so that there is no compilation error. 
	//remove this statement before writing your code.
}
```

 ***Only if you struggle***, access the pseudo-code provided [here](./sumIndexRangePseudoCode.md).

#### Sub-task 2

Complete the body of the method `isBalanced` that assumes that the array passed has an even number of items, and returns `true` if the sum of items in the first half of the array equals the sum of items in the second half of the array, `false` otherwise. 

You **SHOULD** (meaningfully) call the method *sumIndexRange*, even if you didn't finish it or get it right.

For example,

- `data = {10, 70, 20, 80, 0, 20}` --> return `true`
- `data = {10, 70, 20, 10, 10, 80, -50, 70}` --> return `true`
- `data = {10, 70, 80, 20}` --> return `false`

```java
public static boolean isBalanced(int[] data) {
	return false; 
	//so that there is no compilation error. 
	//remove this statement before writing your code.
}
```

## Extra questions for students who want/ need to be challenged 

Solve the following problems (in order of my perception of difficulty) from `codingbat`. Solutions to these will not be released. But you are free to search them online.

Adv1. [https://codingbat.com/prob/p109783](https://codingbat.com/prob/p109783)

Adv2. [https://codingbat.com/prob/p193753](https://codingbat.com/prob/p193753)

Adv3. [https://codingbat.com/prob/p153059](https://codingbat.com/prob/p153059)

Adv4. [https://codingbat.com/prob/p193817](https://codingbat.com/prob/p193817)

Adv5. [https://codingbat.com/prob/p134022](https://codingbat.com/prob/p134022)

Adv6. [https://codingbat.com/prob/p189576](https://codingbat.com/prob/p189576)

Commit message:

Added tip for autogeneration main() method

week 02 - javaEclipse/practicalJavaEclipse.md, after:

# Department of Computing, Macquarie University
## Workshop - Java and Eclipse basics

# Assumptions

You have downloaded and installed Java SE (previously known as Java SDK) on your computer if you are using it. The software is installed in all Computing laboratories.

## IMPORTANT: Pair up for this lab. If you want to work individually, get permission from your tutor.

## Suggested Timeline 

- 5 minutes past start: Structure of a Java program
- 35 minutes past start: JUnit test example
- 70 minutes past start: Completing a simple Java program
- 90 minutes past start: Problem solving


## Structure of a Java program

The following is true for basic java programs (the kind we'll see in the beginning). More advanced program structures shall be discussed as needed.

- A basic java program resides in a `.java` file. 
- **By convention**, the file name begins with an uppercase letter and is camel-cased. For example `HelloWorld.java`.
- The first statement in a file named `XYZ.java` is the class header and must be:
		
```java
public class XYZ {
```

### Question 1.

Which of the following should be the first statement in a file named `Hello.java`?
	
1. `public class Hello {` 
2. `public class hello {`
3. `class Hello {`
4. `class hello {`


A class is like a container for java programs. A *runnable* java program contains a `main` method with the following **header** inside the class.

The header of the `main` method is:

```java
public static void main(String[] args)
```

- `public` means it can be seen by any other code in the program.
- `static` will be covered later.
- `void` because the method doesn't return any value.
- `main` is a special reserved name for this method (like `draw` in Processing).
- `String[]` means it accepts an array of Strings as parameter. We don't use that in this unit but that has to be there.
- `args` is the formal parameter name. We can use any valid value for a literal instead of this.

**TIP** In Eclipse, you can press `Ctrl+Space`, type `main` and press `Enter` to automatically generate the `main()` method. [See here](figs/autogen.mp4) for a demonstration.

### Question 2.

Which of the following are valid headers for the `main` method?
	
1. `public static void main()`
2. `public void main(String[] args)`
3. `public static void main(String[] tom)`
4. `public static void Main(String[] jerry)`
5. `public static void main(int[] args)`
6. `public static void main(String args)`
7. `public void main(String args)`
8. `public static void main(String[] args)`

## The complete picture

So, with the class header outside and the method header inside, a java program looks like this:

```java
public class MyFirstProgram {
	public static void main(String[] args) {
		//your code goes here
	}
	
	//other methods (or functions)
}
```

### Question 3.

1. Create a new Java project named `simpleJavaProject`.
	1. **DO NOT create** `module-info.java` when prompted.
2. Right click on project and choose `New` -> `Class`. 
3. Choose the name `Product`.
	1. Make sure you enable the box for including `public static void main(String[] args)`.
4. In the `main` method of file `Product.java`, initialize two integers with names and values of your choice and display their product. Values are displayed using `System.out.println` method.
5. Run the program using the *Play* button. For example, if the variables hold the values 4 and 9, you should see the value 36 in the console. 

### Question 5.

1. Open package `practicalClassCodes` and then `week02`.

2. Double click on `Welcome.java` and run it using the `Play` Button.

3. You should see the output in the console.

4. Repeat steps 1-3 with `SpeedCalculator.java`

### Question 6.

Complete the steps described in the program `AverageSpeedCalculator.java` so that the average speed of a return trip is calculated. The output should be 15.384....

**TIP** `int/int = int` while `int/double = double`

### Question 7.

Another package in the same project is `practicePackage`, further containing `introduction` and then two packages - `attempts` and `testsAttempts`. Thus, the hierarchy being:

- `practicePackage`
	- `introduction`
		- `attempts`
		- `testsAttempts`

The questions are split across multiple stages. Your tutor will demonstrate what should be done for the following two methods:

1. `square(int)` in `Stage1.java` (method returning `int`), and, 
2. `isPositive(int)` in `Stage1.java`(method returning `boolean`).

**IMPORTANT** Please note that we expect, AT MOST, the top 2% students to be able to complete questions from the final Stage. So don't freak out because you can't solve those.

&nbsp;<p>

### Submission activity for this week

&nbsp;<p>


For week 2 - 

- Complete functions in the `practicePackage.introduction.attempts` package such that the corresponding tests in `practicePackage.introduction.testsAttempts` pass.
- each test passed gets you 3 out of 100 marks.
- total mark are capped at 100. So, passing 34 or more tests gets you 100/100, not more (unfortunately).
- passing mark is 60 (or at least 20 functions).
-  submit ALL corresponding files (so up to 6 java files). 
-  You can make the submission by **Sunday 8th August 21:00**. Late submissions for weekly tasks are NOT accepted.
-  The more functions you can solve, the better prepared you are for the unit. 

[![](http://img.youtube.com/vi/Q1oGIypsPls/0.jpg)](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Q1oGIypsPls "")

<!--Export the relevant part of the project to an archive file using steps shown in the following video

[![](http://img.youtube.com/vi/eeGrh_l5jp0/0.jpg)](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eeGrh_l5jp0 "")

1. Select the project `COMP1010_source_codes_for_students_updated` in the left panel so that it is highlighted in blue.
2. Choose `File`
3. Choose `Export`
4. Double-click (or expand) `General`
5. Double-click `Archive file`.
6. Uncheck the box against `COMP1010_source_codes_for_students`.
7. Choose only the package `practicePackage.introduction.attempts`.
8. Click on `Browse`
9. Choose location of your choice and choose the name `studentID_week_2_submission.zip` (studentID being your 8-digit student ID).
10. Click `Finish`.
11. Upload file `studentID_week_2_submission.zip` under `Week 2 submission`. For example, if your student ID is 40404040, the file you submit, must be `40404040_week_2_submission.zip`.-->

### Question 8 (Problem solving)

This question must be answered **on a piece of paper** that must be returned to the tutor once you've finished.

#### Sub-task 1

Complete the body of the method `sumIndexRange` that returns the sum of all items in the index range in the array passed. Some examples,

- `data = {10, 70, 20, 90, 30}`, `idx1 = 1`, `idx2 = 3` 
	
	--> return `70+20+90` = `180`

- `data = {10, 70, 20, 90, 30}`, `idx1 = 2`, `idx2 = 2` 
	
	--> return `20`
	
```java
public static int sumIndexRange(int[] data, int idx1, int idx2) {
	return 0;
	//so that there is no compilation error. 
	//remove this statement before writing your code.
}
```

 ***Only if you struggle***, access the pseudo-code provided [here](./sumIndexRangePseudoCode.md).

#### Sub-task 2

Complete the body of the method `isBalanced` that assumes that the array passed has an even number of items, and returns `true` if the sum of items in the first half of the array equals the sum of items in the second half of the array, `false` otherwise. 

You **SHOULD** (meaningfully) call the method *sumIndexRange*, even if you didn't finish it or get it right.

For example,

- `data = {10, 70, 20, 80, 0, 20}` --> return `true`
- `data = {10, 70, 20, 10, 10, 80, -50, 70}` --> return `true`
- `data = {10, 70, 80, 20}` --> return `false`

```java
public static boolean isBalanced(int[] data) {
	return false; 
	//so that there is no compilation error. 
	//remove this statement before writing your code.
}
```

## Extra questions for students who want/ need to be challenged 

Solve the following problems (in order of my perception of difficulty) from `codingbat`. Solutions to these will not be released. But you are free to search them online.

Adv1. [https://codingbat.com/prob/p109783](https://codingbat.com/prob/p109783)

Adv2. [https://codingbat.com/prob/p193753](https://codingbat.com/prob/p193753)

Adv3. [https://codingbat.com/prob/p153059](https://codingbat.com/prob/p153059)

Adv4. [https://codingbat.com/prob/p193817](https://codingbat.com/prob/p193817)

Adv5. [https://codingbat.com/prob/p134022](https://codingbat.com/prob/p134022)

Adv6. [https://codingbat.com/prob/p189576](https://codingbat.com/prob/p189576)
