<p dir="ltr" style="text-align: left;">Hi all,<br><br>Please read the rules carefully. The rules can be updated at any stage so use the live rules rather than saving them to a file. Note that you can easily avoid these by eliminating them using a checklist.<br><br>You will get a zero for the entire assessment if any of the following is true,<br></p><ol><li>any of the files contain an infinite loop. this is indicated by a <strong>blue triangle</strong> against a JUnit test during execution, and the fact that the execution of JUnit tests never finishes.</li><li>any of the files contain a compilation error. this is indicated by a red cross against your project. if your project does not have a red cross against it, you are safe on this one. Not JUnit error is not the same as compilation error (watch week 2 video to understand this better).</li><li>any of the files result in <strong>StackOverflowError</strong>.</li><li>any of the files are named incorrectly or if the assignment is not in the required format.</li><li>any use of functions defined outside the submitted files (unless explicitly allowed). Notably, use of <strong>java.util.</strong><strong>Arrays class</strong>&nbsp;(obviously, you can create arrays and use .length and [some index] on them), <strong>LargeInteger</strong> class,&nbsp;<strong>StringBuilder</strong> class, methods from <strong>Math</strong> class (such as <strong>Math.max, Math.min, Math.abs() ..</strong><strong>.</strong>) or <strong>Integer</strong> class (such as <strong>Integer.parseInt</strong>) are prohibited for <strong>all</strong> submissions. Use of built-in&nbsp;<strong>ArrayLists&nbsp;</strong>functions (list.get(i), list.add(), list.remove(), ...) is prohibited for all submissions except the one for built-in ArrayList.</li><li>execution time exceeds the maximum permissible time to run all the tests, which will be specified in specs for each assessment (and if not specified, is 5 seconds by default).<br></li><li>there is a dependency on files not provided as part of the template and/or not submitted. Any code (including helper functions or classes), should be put inside the files included in the template and required to be submitted.</li><li>removal of any import besides the ones already existing in the template causing a compilation error.</li><li>modifying (adding/removing/editing) package declarations.</li><li>modifying anything in test files or modifying any method signature in files submitted.</li><li>submitting file(s) besides the ones provided.</li><li>use of lambdas.</li><li>incorrect file name. For example, we ask for abcd.java, you cannot submit abcd(1).java or "abcd (1).java" or "My Program.java" or "ab cd.java"...</li></ol><p>Programming structures you <strong>ARE</strong> allowed to use:</p><p></p><ol><li>variables,</li><li>casting (For example, int x = (int)(4.5 - 2.7);)</li><li>arithmetic and boolean operators,</li><li>conditions,</li><li>loops,</li><li>break and continue statements,</li><li>arrays,</li><li>helper functions (create your own functions. especially useful to replace Math.min, Math.max, etc.),</li><li>String objects and methods operating on String objects</li><ul><li><span style="font-size: 1rem; font-family: -apple-system, BlinkMacSystemFont, &quot;Segoe UI&quot;, Roboto, &quot;Helvetica Neue&quot;, Arial, &quot;Noto Sans&quot;, sans-serif, &quot;Apple Color Emoji&quot;, &quot;Segoe UI Emoji&quot;, &quot;Segoe UI Symbol&quot;, &quot;Noto Color Emoji&quot;;">get, length, charAt, indexOf, lastIndexOf, substring, equals, equalsIgnoreCase, toLowerCase, toUpperCase, etc.</span></li></ul><li>The ternary operator (For example: int max = a &gt; b ? a : b;). Don't get carried away with this.</li><li>switch statement</li></ol><p></p><p>All the best,</p><p>COMP1010 Teaching Team</p><br><br><p></p>
