week 05 - classes and objects 2/practicalClassesObjects2.md, before:

# School of Computing, Macquarie University

## Practical class - Classes and Objects 2

# NOTE

We will continue working with the master project. This week, we are dealing with package `practicalClassCodes.week05`.

## Question 1

Consider the following code. It's poor design is intentional and given as a take-home exercise for you to figure out.

```java
class Point {
	public int x, y;
	public Point(int x, int y) {
		this.x = x;
		this.y = y;
	}
}

class Line {
	public Point p, q;
	public Line(Point p, Point q) {
		this.p = p;
		this.q = q;
	}
}

class Triangle {
	public Line a, b, c;
	public Triangle(Line a, Line b, Line c) {
		this.a = a;
		this.b = b;
		this.c = c;
	}
}
```

### Client1

Draw the memory diagram for the following client. How many references and instances are there? Label each as "Class Instance/Reference".
	
```java
public class Client1 {
	public static void main(String[] args) {
		Point p1 = new Point(10, 70);
		Point p2 = new Point(20, 90);
		Point p3 = new Point(30, 80);
		Line e1 = new Line(p1, p2);
		Line e2 = new Line(p2, p3);
		Line e3 = new Line(p3, p1);
		// list all references and instances here
	}
}
```

### Client2 and design flaw (Take-home exercise)

Draw the memory diagram for the following client. How many references and instances are there? Label each as "Class Instance/Reference". What are the problems with the design? How can you avoid them?
	
```java
public class Client2 {
	public static void main(String[] args) {
		Point p1 = new Point(10, 70);
		Point p2 = new Point(20, 90);
		Point p3 = new Point(30, 80);
		Line e1 = new Line(p1, p2);
		Line e2 = new Line(p2, p3);
		Line e3 = new Line(p3, p1);
		Triangle t = new Triangle(e1, e2, e3);
	}
}
```
	
<!-- In this design, you can have triangle with three disjoint lines, which is not possible.

```java
public class Client2 {
	public static void main(String[] args) {
		Point p1 = new Point(10, 70);
		Point p2 = new Point(20, 90);
		Point p3 = new Point(30, 80);
		Point p4 = new Point(40, 60);
		Point p5 = new Point(50, 70);
		Point p6 = new Point(0, 80);
		Line e1 = new Line(p1, p2);
		Line e2 = new Line(p3, p4);
		Line e3 = new Line(p5, p5);
		Triangle t = new Triangle(e1, e2, e3); //not a valid triangle
	}
}
```
Triangles should have three points as instance variables, instead of lines.

```java
class Point {
	public int x, y;
	public Point(int x, int y) {
		this.x = x;
		tihs.y = y;
	}
}

class Line { //you can leave it as is
	public Point p, q;
	public Line(Point p, Point q) {
		this.p = p;
		this.q = q;
	}
}

class Triangle {
	public Point a, b, c; //NOT LINES
	public Triangle(Point a, Point b, Point c) {
		this.a = a;
		this.b = b;
		tihs.c = c;
	}
}

public class Client2Fixed {
	public static void main(String[] args) {
		Point p1 = new Point(10, 70);
		Point p2 = new Point(20, 90);
		Point p3 = new Point(30, 80);
		Point p4 = new Point(40, 60);
		Point p5 = new Point(50, 70);
		Point p6 = new Point(0, 80);
		Triangle t1 = new Triangle(p1, p2, p3);
		Triangle t2 = new Triangle(p4, p5, p6);
	}
}
``` -->
	
## Question 2

For the class `Rectangle` in the project contained in `practicalClassCodes.week05`, consider the following client code (outside `Rectangle` class):

```java
Rectangle[] data = new Rectangle[5];
```


1. Draw the memory diagram representing the storage of array `data`.

2.	What is the output of the following client code:

	```java
	for(int i=0; i < data.length; i++) {
		System.out.println(data[i]);
	}
	```

	<!--### SOLUTION
	```bash
	null
	null
	null
	null
	null
	```-->

3. 	Instantiate each item of the array so that,
	- the first item represents a square with `width=1, height=1`.
	- the second item represents a square with `width=2, height=2`.
	- the third item represents a square with `width=3, height=3`.
	- the fourth item represents a square with `width=4, height=4`.
	- the fifth item represents a square with `width=5, height=5`.

	<!--## SOLUTION
	
	```java
	for(int i=0; i < data.length; i++) {
		data[i] = new Rectangle(i+1); //square constructor exists
	}
	```-->

4. 	Draw the updated memory diagram after the items have been instantiated.

## Question 3

Take a look at the implementation of `countSquares` in class `RectangleClient.java`, that when passed an array of `Rectangle` objects, returns the number of squares in the array. Note that the class `Rectangle` contains an intance method `isSquare()` that you can call.

Along the same lines, write a function `allSquares` in class `RectangleClient.java`, that when passed an array of `Rectangle` objects, returns `true` if all objects are *squares*, and `false` otherwise.

You may assume that the array passed and also every `Rectangle` in the array is instantiated. 

For a more comprehensive design, avoid that assumption, so,
- the array might be `null`, or if it is (instantiated), 
- some `Rectangle` objects in the array might be `null`.

Also, write your own test case in class `RectangleClientTest.java`.

<!--
## SOLUTION
	
#### Without assumption:

```java
public static int countSquares(Rectangle[] data) {
	int count = 0;
	for(int i=0; i < data.length; i++) {
		if(data[i].isSquare()) {
			count++;
		}
	}
	return count;
}
```

#### Without assumption:

```java
public static int countSquares(Rectangle[] data) {
	if(data == null) { //nothing inside
		return 0;
	}
	
	int count = 0;
	for(int i=0; i < data.length; i++) {
		if(data[i] != null && data[i].isSquare()) { //first make sure it's not null
			count++;
		}
	}
	return count;
}
```
-->

## KAHOOT TIME!!!

------------
# END OF PRACTICAL CLASS
------------

# ADVANCED QUESTIONS (HD level)

1. Write a method `groupSameAreas` in class `Advanced` that when passed an array of `Rectangle` objects (say `data`), returns a two-dimensional array of `Rectangle` objects (say `buckets`), such that all objects from `data` with the same area are in the same one-dimensional array in `buckets`. That is,

	- all objects in the one-dimensional array `buckets[0]` have the same area,
	- all objects in the one-dimensional array `buckets[1]` have the same area, 
	- all objects in the one-dimensional array `buckets[2]` have the same area, 
	- all objects in the one-dimensional array `buckets[3]` have the same area, 
	- and so on...

2. (Not related to classes and objects but aimed at students who might want something a little... extra 😛). Complete the method `longestRecurringSequence` in class `Advanced` that returns the longest sequence of items that occurs more than once in the array. return the array that occurs first in case of a tie.

---------

# Submission Task

### Due: 5pm (17:00:00), Sunday 27th March Sydney Time

This week, we will digress from the practice package. Download [comp1010\_week\_5\_submission\_template.zip](./codes/comp1010_week_5_submission_template.zip), import the project, and complete the methods in,

1. `Box.java`
2. `DeliveryTruck.java`

Fixes in case your project has red exclamations:
[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=I7yzguSZLow&ab_channel=gaurav1780](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=I7yzguSZLow&ab_channel=gaurav1780)

**IMPORTANT**: In the javadoc for `compareTo` in Box, I have written:

```java
	 * comparison criteria: volume -> surface area
```

This means, primary criterion is volume and secondary criterion (only if you cannot make a decision based on volume) is surface area. So compare volumes and return 1 or -1 if possible, and **only otherwise**, compare surface areas. Similarly, for `compareToAdvanced`, there are five levels of criteria. Apologies for the confusion due to the way it's written. 

There are 20 methods you need to complete, each worth 5 marks.

Passing criteria is:

1. At least 7 methods from `Box.java`, AND,
2. At least 3 methods from  `DeliveryTruck.java`.

Your mark will be capped at 49 if you don't satisfy the passing criteria. For example, if 14 methods pass in `Box.java` but none in `DeliveryTruck.java`, you will get 49 marks, and you won't pass the weekly hurdle.

Rules applicable to all submissions are on iLearn.

**Due date: 5pm (17:00:00), Sunday 27th March Sydney Time**.

As usual, **late submissions will not be accepted!**

Commit message:

Update week5 submission question since it's in the practice package

week 05 - classes and objects 2/practicalClassesObjects2.md, after:

# School of Computing, Macquarie University

## Practical class - Classes and Objects 2

# NOTE

We will continue working with the master project. This week, we are dealing with package `practicalClassCodes.week05`.

## Question 1

Consider the following code. It's poor design is intentional and given as a take-home exercise for you to figure out.

```java
class Point {
	public int x, y;
	public Point(int x, int y) {
		this.x = x;
		this.y = y;
	}
}

class Line {
	public Point p, q;
	public Line(Point p, Point q) {
		this.p = p;
		this.q = q;
	}
}

class Triangle {
	public Line a, b, c;
	public Triangle(Line a, Line b, Line c) {
		this.a = a;
		this.b = b;
		this.c = c;
	}
}
```

### Client1

Draw the memory diagram for the following client. How many references and instances are there? Label each as "Class Instance/Reference".
	
```java
public class Client1 {
	public static void main(String[] args) {
		Point p1 = new Point(10, 70);
		Point p2 = new Point(20, 90);
		Point p3 = new Point(30, 80);
		Line e1 = new Line(p1, p2);
		Line e2 = new Line(p2, p3);
		Line e3 = new Line(p3, p1);
		// list all references and instances here
	}
}
```

### Client2 and design flaw (Take-home exercise)

Draw the memory diagram for the following client. How many references and instances are there? Label each as "Class Instance/Reference". What are the problems with the design? How can you avoid them?
	
```java
public class Client2 {
	public static void main(String[] args) {
		Point p1 = new Point(10, 70);
		Point p2 = new Point(20, 90);
		Point p3 = new Point(30, 80);
		Line e1 = new Line(p1, p2);
		Line e2 = new Line(p2, p3);
		Line e3 = new Line(p3, p1);
		Triangle t = new Triangle(e1, e2, e3);
	}
}
```
	
<!-- In this design, you can have triangle with three disjoint lines, which is not possible.

```java
public class Client2 {
	public static void main(String[] args) {
		Point p1 = new Point(10, 70);
		Point p2 = new Point(20, 90);
		Point p3 = new Point(30, 80);
		Point p4 = new Point(40, 60);
		Point p5 = new Point(50, 70);
		Point p6 = new Point(0, 80);
		Line e1 = new Line(p1, p2);
		Line e2 = new Line(p3, p4);
		Line e3 = new Line(p5, p5);
		Triangle t = new Triangle(e1, e2, e3); //not a valid triangle
	}
}
```
Triangles should have three points as instance variables, instead of lines.

```java
class Point {
	public int x, y;
	public Point(int x, int y) {
		this.x = x;
		tihs.y = y;
	}
}

class Line { //you can leave it as is
	public Point p, q;
	public Line(Point p, Point q) {
		this.p = p;
		this.q = q;
	}
}

class Triangle {
	public Point a, b, c; //NOT LINES
	public Triangle(Point a, Point b, Point c) {
		this.a = a;
		this.b = b;
		tihs.c = c;
	}
}

public class Client2Fixed {
	public static void main(String[] args) {
		Point p1 = new Point(10, 70);
		Point p2 = new Point(20, 90);
		Point p3 = new Point(30, 80);
		Point p4 = new Point(40, 60);
		Point p5 = new Point(50, 70);
		Point p6 = new Point(0, 80);
		Triangle t1 = new Triangle(p1, p2, p3);
		Triangle t2 = new Triangle(p4, p5, p6);
	}
}
``` -->
	
## Question 2

For the class `Rectangle` in the project contained in `practicalClassCodes.week05`, consider the following client code (outside `Rectangle` class):

```java
Rectangle[] data = new Rectangle[5];
```


1. Draw the memory diagram representing the storage of array `data`.

2.	What is the output of the following client code:

	```java
	for(int i=0; i < data.length; i++) {
		System.out.println(data[i]);
	}
	```

	<!--### SOLUTION
	```bash
	null
	null
	null
	null
	null
	```-->

3. 	Instantiate each item of the array so that,
	- the first item represents a square with `width=1, height=1`.
	- the second item represents a square with `width=2, height=2`.
	- the third item represents a square with `width=3, height=3`.
	- the fourth item represents a square with `width=4, height=4`.
	- the fifth item represents a square with `width=5, height=5`.

	<!--## SOLUTION
	
	```java
	for(int i=0; i < data.length; i++) {
		data[i] = new Rectangle(i+1); //square constructor exists
	}
	```-->

4. 	Draw the updated memory diagram after the items have been instantiated.

## Question 3

Take a look at the implementation of `countSquares` in class `RectangleClient.java`, that when passed an array of `Rectangle` objects, returns the number of squares in the array. Note that the class `Rectangle` contains an intance method `isSquare()` that you can call.

Along the same lines, write a function `allSquares` in class `RectangleClient.java`, that when passed an array of `Rectangle` objects, returns `true` if all objects are *squares*, and `false` otherwise.

You may assume that the array passed and also every `Rectangle` in the array is instantiated. 

For a more comprehensive design, avoid that assumption, so,
- the array might be `null`, or if it is (instantiated), 
- some `Rectangle` objects in the array might be `null`.

Also, write your own test case in class `RectangleClientTest.java`.

<!--
## SOLUTION
	
#### Without assumption:

```java
public static int countSquares(Rectangle[] data) {
	int count = 0;
	for(int i=0; i < data.length; i++) {
		if(data[i].isSquare()) {
			count++;
		}
	}
	return count;
}
```

#### Without assumption:

```java
public static int countSquares(Rectangle[] data) {
	if(data == null) { //nothing inside
		return 0;
	}
	
	int count = 0;
	for(int i=0; i < data.length; i++) {
		if(data[i] != null && data[i].isSquare()) { //first make sure it's not null
			count++;
		}
	}
	return count;
}
```
-->

## KAHOOT TIME!!!

------------
# END OF PRACTICAL CLASS
------------

# ADVANCED QUESTIONS (HD level)

1. Write a method `groupSameAreas` in class `Advanced` that when passed an array of `Rectangle` objects (say `data`), returns a two-dimensional array of `Rectangle` objects (say `buckets`), such that all objects from `data` with the same area are in the same one-dimensional array in `buckets`. That is,

	- all objects in the one-dimensional array `buckets[0]` have the same area,
	- all objects in the one-dimensional array `buckets[1]` have the same area, 
	- all objects in the one-dimensional array `buckets[2]` have the same area, 
	- all objects in the one-dimensional array `buckets[3]` have the same area, 
	- and so on...

2. (Not related to classes and objects but aimed at students who might want something a little... extra 😛). Complete the method `longestRecurringSequence` in class `Advanced` that returns the longest sequence of items that occurs more than once in the array. return the array that occurs first in case of a tie.

---------

# Submission Task

### Due: 5pm (17:00:00), Sunday 27th March Sydney Time

This week, you should work on the following methods in `practicePackage._03_classesObjects.attempts`,

1. `Box.java`
2. `DeliveryTruck.java`

**IMPORTANT**: In the javadoc for `compareTo` in Box, I have written:

```java
	 * comparison criteria: volume -> surface area
```

This means, primary criterion is volume and secondary criterion (only if you cannot make a decision based on volume) is surface area. So compare volumes and return 1 or -1 if possible, and **only otherwise**, compare surface areas. Similarly, for `compareToAdvanced`, there are five levels of criteria. Apologies for the confusion due to the way it's written. 

There are 20 methods you need to complete, each worth 5 marks.

Passing criteria is:

1. At least 7 methods from `Box.java`, AND,
2. At least 3 methods from  `DeliveryTruck.java`.

Your mark will be capped at 49 if you don't satisfy the passing criteria. For example, if 14 methods pass in `Box.java` but none in `DeliveryTruck.java`, you will get 49 marks, and you won't pass the weekly hurdle.

Rules applicable to all submissions are on iLearn.

**Due date: 5pm (17:00:00), Sunday 27th March Sydney Time**.

As usual, **late submissions will not be accepted!**
